# Global HPKE Keypairs

Janus has support for HPKE key advertisement on `/hpke_configs` that are not
tied to tasks.

If a global key is configured, requests to `/hpke_configs` that don't provide
the task ID will provide the list of active global HPKE keys.

If global keys are to be used exclusively, use the feature flag
`require_global_hpke_keys`. This will cause Janus to ignore the `?task_id`
parameter of `/hpke_configs` entirely and serve only global HPKE keys. This
will become the default behavior in the next major version of Janus.

This document describes the operational considerations of managing global HPKE
keys.

## Key Rotator

It is strongly recommended to use the `key_rotator` component to manage global
HPKE key provisioning and lifecycle.

### Binary Key Rotator

Use the `key_rotator` subcommand of the `janus_aggregator` binary to invoke
the key rotator once. 
It can be invoked like so:
```
export DATASTORE_KEYS=[your database encryption key]
export PGPASSWORD=[your postgresql password here]
janus_aggregator key_rotator --config-file [path to configuration yaml]
```

where the configuration is like so:
```
database:
  url: "postgres://postgres:postgres@localhost:5432/postgres"

key_rotator:
  hpke: {}
```

This will create a single key and rotate it through a reasonable lifecycle. See
the [advanced sample](./samples/advanced_config/key_rotator.yaml) to see
defaults and what options are available.

Run this command on a cronjob, using your cron scheduling daemon of choice
(e.g. normal `cron`, systemd timers, Kubernetes CronJobs) on some reasonable
cadence.

This is the recommended way to run the key rotator.

### In-process Key Rotator

A less recommended, but simpler way to run the key rotator is to run it as part
of the normal Janus aggregator.

In your aggregator configuration file, write.
```yaml
key_rotator:
  hpke: {}
```

Then restart the aggregator. This will create a single key and rotate it
through a reasonable lifecycle. See the
[advanced sample](./samples/advanced_config/aggregator.yaml) to see defaults
and what options are available.

Note that each aggregator replica will run the key rotator. This isn't harmful,
since the key rotator is safe to run concurrently, but this is wasteful. For
high scale deployments, run the [key rotator separately](#binary-key-rotator).

This is useful for bring-your-own-helper deployments that want a simpler single
binary deployment strategy.

## Key Lifecycle

A global keypair has three states:
- `pending`: The key is in the database, but is not being advertised to clients.
- `active`: The key is being advertised to clients, and clients should use it
  to encrypt reports.
- `expired`: The key is not advertised to clients and will eventually be deleted.

These states are to facilitate key caching and rotation. The lifecycle of a key
is as follows:
1. The key is created in the `pending` state.
1. The in-memory caches of all Janus replicas must pick up the new key. This can
   be done by waiting or restarting the replicas.
1. The key is moved to the `active` state.
1. Caches must reload or the application can be restarted. The pending key already
   being in-memory ensures that replicas that haven't had their advertisement
   cache reloaded can still use the pending key to decrypt reports.
1. The key operates dutifully for however long the key rotation interval is.
1. When the key is due for expiry, a new key is introduced using the same steps
   as above.
1. The old key is moved to the `expired` state so that it's no longer advertised
   to clients. Because clients cache the HPKE advertisement, the key must still
   be available for report decryption.
1. For system integrity and availability, the expired key should not be deleted
   until after the last client report submitted before the key was expired has
   also expired.
   
## Manual Provisioning

### Aggregator API
A key can be manually generated by using the Janus aggregator API.

```bash
AGGREGATOR_URL=http://localhost:8081
AGGREGATOR_API_TOKEN="BASE64URL UNPADDED TOKEN HERE"

curl -v -X PUT \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AGGREGATOR_API_TOKEN" \
    -H "Accept: application/vnd.janus.aggregator+json;version=0.1" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.janus.aggregator+json;version=0.1" \
    "$AGGREGATOR_URL/hpke_configs" \
    --data '{}'
```

Example response:
```json
{
  "config": {
    "id": 1,
    "kem_id": "X25519HkdfSha256",
    "kdf_id": "HkdfSha256",
    "aead_id": "Aes128Gcm",
    "public_key": "Q6WsU8wTEYLGaSUZ0M64osfG67AfwZBxWvXp3lxIfxQ"
  },
  "state": "pending"
}
```

The keypair and ID will be generated for you, and stored in the database. If
you need to change the ciphers used, provide the `kem_id`, `kdf_id`, `aead_id`
parameters in the request body.

The key is created in the pending state. To move it into the active state:
```bash
KEY_ID=1

curl -v -X PATCH \
    -H "Authorization: Bearer $AGGREGATOR_API_TOKEN" \
    -H "Accept: application/vnd.janus.aggregator+json;version=0.1" \
    -H "Content-Type: application/vnd.janus.aggregator+json;version=0.1" \
    "$AGGREGATOR_URL/hpke_configs/$KEY_ID" \
    --data '{"state": "active"}'
```


This should return `200 OK` on success. If you need to mark it expired, change
the request body.

Other helpful methods are as follows:
- `GET /hpke_configs`: retrieve the details about all global keys.
- `GET /hpke_configs/{:id}`: retrieve the details about a single key.
- `DELETE /hpke_configs/{:id}`: fully delete a key from the database, this is
  dangerous!

Note that the aggregator API will never directly expose the private key to you.
